+++
date = 2017-04-07
draft = false
tags = ["R", "software development", "web dev", "Multi-state modelling"]
title = "An interactive Multi-State Modelling Shiny web app"
math = false
+++

In the last couple of months I've been teaching myself about multi-state survival models for use in an upcoming project. While I found the theoretical concepts relatively straight forward, I started having issues when I began to start implementing the models in software. There are many considerations to be made when building a multi-state model, such as:

  - Convert the data into a suitable long format
  - Deciding whether to use either parametric or semi-parametric models
  - Different subsets of the available covariates can be selected for each of the transition hazards
  - In addition, covariates can be forced to have the same hazard ratio on every transition
  - There's a choice to be made between clock-forward or clock-reset (semi-Markov models) time-scales
  - The Markov assumption can be further violated by including the state arrival times as part of the transition hazard; this often has theoretical justification
  - The baseline hazards can be kept stratified by transition, or certain ones can be assumed to be proportional

Needless to say, actually building a model was very time consuming. While I knew in my head what model for the transition hazards I wanted to use, I found the actual software implementation in R - in particular the `mstate` and `flexsurv` packages - wasn't very intuitive. I realised I was spending more time trying to figure how to implement a state-arrival time covariate for a transition, for example, than actually thinking about the model at a higher level.

To help address this, I developed an interactive web app to abstract the software implementation details away so that the model builder can instead focus on the models themselves. Because I'm unimaginative, I named this app `MSM-Shiny`. While I initially developed this app for myself to streamline my model building and data exploration pipeline, I realised it could benefit others and so developed it into a fully configurable app.

I debuted it at the 6th Survival Analysis for Junior Researchers conference this past week in Leicester, where my presentation received the Best Presentation award.

I've made the app freely available on my [Github page](https://github.com/stulacy/msm-shiny), and I'd love to hear any feedback on it.



